---
layout: post
section: blog
title: "The Tale of Cars and Mechanics (Producers vs Consumers of Machine Learning algorithms)"
comments: true
---

# {{page.title}}

With the recent hype around Deep Learning and easily accessible machine learning libraries/toolkits, etc there is a rising
question whether part of machine learning is slowly turning into a set of pluggable software modules and engineering artifacts, which a person (even without a domain knowledge) can come in and make use of, to solve his specific applcations. This also relates to the frequently asked questions about building "data science" experts. Several courses, certifications exist online which are geared towards covering some of these toolkits and basic algorithms to get you upto speed into this field, and apply them to problems to your choice. While I feel, such wide-spread coverage on Artificial Intelligence and the success of Deep Learning methods are certainly helping in bringing the field into the much needed global limelight, I feel that the world is rushing into making several hasty conclusions. I also frequently hear the questions about the role of scientist vs engineers in Machine Learning. My goal in this post is to present some of my thoughts on these through a story (I am a big fan of analogies!).

The analogy I would like to provide is - picture a machine learning algorithm/method as a car. We all own and drive cars, and it is a relatively easy task how to learn to drive one. It probably takes a few months of effort to learn the necessary driving skills and obtain a license, but it is a routine thing that millions of people do. On the other hand, not everybody knows (and learns) what goes under the hood of the car, the nuts and bolts that operate this machine. There are only few handful of such people (whom we call "mechanics") who specialize in this aspect. They certainly spend more than the few months (taken by a common man to get a license) to build their knowledge and expertise on how this incredibly complicated automobile works. They can take apart an entire car into its bare metal parts in hours, troubleshoot and put it back, running healthy again. They understand the subtleties of engine design, the differences between different type/size of axles, impact of using shock-absorbers, gears, etc. There is a whole lot of complicated stuff happening when we turn in the ignition key or slam on the brakes (especially these days, thanks to the incredibly sophisticated features built into a car). Note how neither of these two roles are superior than the other (they both need each other to sustain their business), however they have completely different objectives.

The "driver" of the car is what I like to call as a "consumer" of machine learning algorithms, one who likes to apply it to varying problems in his domain (that takes him to places he has never been, meet people he has not met and get things done!). The "mechanic" on the other hand is analogous to the "producer" of machine learning algorithms, who is more focussed on using the nuts and bolts (tools from math, statistics, other computational fields, systems, etc) to build/fix these algorithms. No matter how many years of experience one has driving the car, when it breaks down the assistance of a mechanic seems inevitable. To add to that, you need annual maintenances and checks ups to be done. When things go wrong, troubleshooting is not trivial for a driver. This is exactly the situation in machine learning, where toolkits like deep-learning are now enabling more and more newer drivers to get onto the road. You could use Tensor-flow and Theano to build a Convolution Neural Network to perfectly distinguish cats vs dogs by trying out all tunable parameters, but the understanding of why you get the results that you see is limited. What does it mean when you switch from one "transfer function" to another in the your favorite deep learning <a href="http://playground.tensorflow.org/">UI interface</a>? (btw, it is an amazing visualization tool for a neural network and I do not mean to undermine it, just trying to prove a point). It is often mistaken that - "learning to drive" is all that is left to machine learning. There was a great <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=furfdqtdAvc">panel on Deep learning</a> at KDD 2016 (which I totally recommend watching btw) and I quote one of the speakers (Pedros Domingos) say "Deep Learning is now assumed to be synonymous to Machine Learning and also to Artificial Intelligence, soon people are going to assume it to be synonymous with "Computer Science".

My advice for people starting out in this field would be to learn a bit of both ("consumer" as well as "producer" aspects) and not shun away the "producer" aspect (yes, there is lot of math, but it exists for a reason. And math does not have to be learned only via equations, it can also be well appreciated via intuitions, pictures and toy examples). Try implementing a machine learning algorithm from scratch (write out the equations, code it up, fix all numerical issues that arise and test it out on a real dataset), this is probably the best way to understand the algorithm (what better way to understand a car than to build a toy car yourself! :)) Because machine learning has evolved from several scientic disciplines, you cannot ignore the science aspect of it. To some extent, online education such as coursera and udacity have really tried to train more and more "consumers" to become aware of some of these "producer" aspects, but as you can realize from the analogy I provided above, it is not a 6-month or few weeks task. It does take time and experience. That is where the value of machine learning courses taught in grad schools come in, where there is more liberty for the faculty members to cover more of these fundamentals. Doing a PhD in this area is on the other extreme end, where you train to be a "mechanic" for several years specializing on a specific model or part of a car. Having worked at such a low-level for years, it becomes somewhat easier to see the similarities and differences between how the same parts in different automobile makers work. You begin to see how things are connected, understand the basic principles behind constructing these automobile parts, discover new ways to build and improve these. And at the end of your PhD comes the important decision of whether you want to remain a "mechanic" for your lifetime :) or switch to doing some "driving", or perhaps a convex combination of both! :)

Hope I was able to answer some of the questions one might have! I plan to add more later.
